Document the concept of “experimental feature” (#5930)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/src/contributing/experimental-features.md

This section describes the notion of *experimental features*, and how it fits into the big picture of the development of Nix.

# What are experimental features?

[Since Nix 2.4](../release-notes/rl-2.4.md), some features of Nix can be flagged as experimental.

> Experimental features can be changed or removed at any time, and users must [explicitly enable them](../nix-conf.md#conf-expeirmental-features).

Author: ```suggestion
Experimental features can be changed or removed at any time, and users must [explicitly enable them](../nix-conf.md#conf-experimental-features).
```

This allows accessing new functionality that is not yet stable without unwittingly relying on them.

# When should a new feature be marked experimental?

> A change in the Nix codebase should be guarded by an experimental feature flag if it is considered likely to be reverted or adapted in a backwards-incompatible manner after gathering more experience with it in practice.
> 
> Examples:
> 
> - Changes to the Nix language, such as new built-ins, syntactic or semantic changes, etc.
> - Changes to the command-line interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A change in the Nix codebase should be guarded by an experimental feature flag if it needs the Nix community to gather experience with it before we can decide what we want it to be.

For most changes, experimenting with the pull request branch before it is merged should be good enough --- if the Nix maintainers are not confident in the design or implementation, then the PR must not be merged. But for some larger, highly visible, or important changes, this will not work:

  - The Nix maintainers need input from community at large need to help with the decision. The Nix community at large needs an easy and safe way to experiment and gain experience with the idea, and trying out pull request miscellaneous branches is neither easy or safe enough.

  - A long period of experimentation and gaining experience is necessary. Keeping a PR open for that length of time would result in and undue burden of fixing conflicts. With just a PR, we also loose out on the opportunity for the change (especially if the maintainers are leaning towards accepting it) influencing other development and thus gaining experience with the maintained costs and benefits of the features.
  
Conversely, just merging the feature and hoping it was designed correctly the first time is also impractical:
 - If we don't want the feature after all, removing it is a breaking change and prohibited without a major version bump. 
 - Even if we do mostly like the feature it may still some breaking changes to improve its design, again prohibited without a major version bump.

What we thus need is a middle-ground between merging a feature which instantly becomes stable, and requesting further changes to the PR without merging it. That is where experimental features come in:

 - The feature is merged so it is easy to try it out and gain more experience
 - The feature is not stable so breaking changes to the feature including removal are completely permissible
 - The feature is *guarded* so regular uses will not use it by mistake, and thus are shielded from any instability.

Examples:

- Changes to the Nix language, such as new built-ins, syntactic or semantic changes, etc.
- Changes to the command-line interface
```

Reviewer 2: I think we've already captured that in [one sentence:](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/5930/files#diff-c60361f52f0e428ab378856cac200ca405b6f43f71a1c78621c67208ca4e3391R53)
> An experimental feature enables developers to iterate on and deliver a new idea without committing to it or requiring a costly long-running fork.

# Lifecycle of an experimental feature

Experimental features have to be treated on a case-by-case basis.
However, the standard workflow for an experimental feature is as follows:

> - The feature is implemented in a pull request.
> - The feature is guarded by an experimental feature flag that is disabled by default, and the pull request is merged.
>     - Being experimental, the feature can still be changed arbitrarily or removed again.
> - The experimental feature flag can be removed and the feature is considered stable if:
>   - There is enough evidence of users having tried the feature, such as feedback, fixed bugs, demonstrations of how it is put to use
>   - Maintainers feel confident that
>     - The feature is designed and implemented sensibly, that it is fit for purpose
>     - Potential interactions are well-understood
>     - Stabilising the feature will not incur an outsized maintenance burden in the future

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The feature is implemented in a pull request, guarded by an experimental feature flag that is disabled by default, and the pull request is merged.
- The feature is *experimented* with by interested parties
    - Those that wish to experiment with the feature must explicitly enable it, signifying they are aware of the risk of using unstable ideas and are consenting to them.
    - Being experimental, the feature can still be changed arbitrarily.
- If the experience with the feature is negative, the feature is *removed*
  - The feature itself is removed, and the named experimental feature flag is also removed along with it.
- If the experience with the feature is positive, the feature is *stabilized*
  - The feature itself is kept, and just the experimental feature flag itself is removed, ungating the experimental feature so it is always enabled.
  - To reach this step:
    - There must be is enough evidence of users having tried the feature, such as feedback, fixed bugs, demonstrations of how it is put to use
    - Maintainers must feel confident that
      - The feature is designed and implemented sensibly, that it is fit for purpose
      - Potential interactions are well-understood
      - Stabilising the feature will not incur an outsized maintenance burden in the future
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A new feature is implemented in a *pull request*
  - It is guarded by an experimental feature flag that is disabled by default
- The pull request is merged, the *experimental* feature ends up in a release
    - Using the feature requires explicitly enabling it, signifying awareness of the potential risks
    - Being experimental, the feature can still be changed arbitrarily
- The feature can be *removed*
  - The associated experimental feature flag is also removed
- The the feature can be made *stable*
  - The associated experimental feature flag is removed
  - There should be enough evidence of users having tried the feature, such as feedback, fixed bugs, demonstrations of how it is put to use
  - Maintainers must feel confident that:
    - The feature is designed and implemented sensibly, that it is fit for purpose
    - Potential interactions are well-understood
    - Stabilising the feature will not incur an outsized maintenance burden in the future
```

Reviewer: That looks good to me!

The following diagram illustrates the process:

<!-- TODO: replace with ASCII art to render correctly once contents are agreed upon -->

```mermaid
flowchart
  idea([idea]) --> |discussion, design, implementation| pr([pull request])
  experimental --> |"user feedback, (breaking) changes"| pr

  pr --> |review| pr
  pr --> |merge| experimental
  experimental --> |decision to stabilise| stable

>   experimental --> |decision against keeping the feature| removed

Reviewer 2: I disagree that we should add more words to the diagram. It's only for illustration, just to get an overview. Stuffing it with information makes it unreadable.

This section describes the notion of *experimental features*, and how it fits into the big picture of the development of Nix.

# What are experimental features?

[Since Nix 2.4](../release-notes/rl-2.4.md), some features of Nix can be flagged as experimental.
Experimental features can be changed or removed at any time, and users must [explicitly enable them](../nix-conf.md#conf-experimental-features).
This allows accessing new functionality that is not yet stable without unwittingly relying on them.

# When should a new feature be marked experimental?

> A change in the Nix codebase should be guarded by an experimental feature flag if it is considered likely to be reverted or adapted in a backwards-incompatible manner after gathering more experience with it in practice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Experimental features are needed for high stakes changes to Nix that benefit from broad community feedback.

Most of the time, experimentation happens prior to merging PRs; Nix maintainers merge changes when we are confident in those changes.
Merging changes we are not confident and then regretting those decisions leads to either:
 - Breaking our stability guarantee
 - Sticking with a design we think is bad

But for larger or highly visible changes, merging PRs only after we have become confident is not practical:
  - The PR would have to be open for a very long period of time, past the point of being an acceptable burden to the PR author
  - The barrier to installing an unofficial non-release version of Nix means we still wouldn't get enough community input.

Experimental features are a middle ground which, via a little extra code, avoids all these bad outcomes.
```

> Examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of larger and highly visible requiring experimental features:
```

Reviewer: (It was fine before, but if we add my longer description above, I think it stops becoming clear what this is an example of :)
